Project Gutenberg's Poisonous Snakes of Kansas, by Robert F. Clarke

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Poisonous Snakes of Kansas

Author: Robert F. Clarke

Release Date: March 14, 2019 [EBook #59061]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POISONOUS SNAKES OF KANSAS ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                       POISONOUS SNAKES OF KANSAS


                            Robert F. Clarke
                         Department of Biology
                Kansas State Teachers College of Emporia


                     _THE KANSAS SCHOOL NATURALIST_
                     Vol. 5 No. 3    February 1959




                               The Kansas
                           School Naturalist


                             _Published by_
              The Kansas State Teachers College of Emporia


                        _Prepared and Issued by_

                    The Department of Biology, with
              the cooperation of the Division of Education

                       _Editor_: John Breukelman
                         Department of Biology

    _Editorial Committee_: Ina M. Borman, Robert F. Clarke, Helen M.
       Douglass, Gilbert A. Leisman, Carl W. Prophet, Dixon Smith


Because of the greatly increased cost, due to the color plates, no free
copies of this issue will be available. Extra copies may be obtained for
25 cents each, postpaid. Send orders to _The Kansas School Naturalist_,
Department of Biology, State Teachers College, Emporia, Kansas.


_The Kansas School Naturalist_ is sent upon request, free of charge, to
Kansas teachers and others interested in nature education.

_The Kansas School Naturalist_ is published in October, December,
February, and April of each year by The Kansas State Teachers College,
Twelfth Avenue and Commercial Street, Emporia, Kansas. Second-class mail
privileges authorized at Emporia, Kansas.




                       Poisonous Snakes of Kansas
                          by Robert F. Clarke


Many persons either do not know anything at all about the poisonous
snakes of our state or have a distorted group of misconceptions
concerning them. These misconceptions run from plain misknowledge about
the range or identification of poisonous snakes to fancifully elaborate
stories in which there may or may not be the barest thread of fact.

The prime reason that every person should know the poisonous snakes of
his region by sight and know something about their habits, distribution,
and abundance is that it will ease the mind of the average individual in
all of his outdoor pursuits. Most persons have heard so many false
stories about snakes that they develop a fear of _all_ snakes. _This
fear is unfounded!_ A person who knows what poisonous snakes he can
expect to encounter in a given area need only learn to identify these
and realize that _all other snakes_, _lizards_, _frogs_, _toads_,
_salamanders_, and _turtles_ do not have a poisonous bite, and,
therefore, he need not fear them. With a knowledge of the poisonous
snakes, a person can avoid places where these snakes might be found.
Another aspect is the _conservation_ of snakes. Too many people kill
snakes just because they happen to be snakes. This is uncalled for
destruction—a non-poisonous snake should no more be killed than a song
bird. In many cases, the harmless snakes are of direct economic value.

In general, all snakes are similar in habits. In Kansas, they retire for
the winter in places where the temperature will not get below the
freezing point. These may be in rocky ledges, beneath the soil, below
the roots of trees, or in protected places of human design, such as
grain bins, cisterns, cellars, and silos. With the warm days of spring,
the snakes emerge from their winter quarters and set about finding food
and mates. After mating, the sexes separate and each individual snake
goes its own way to forage for food for the rest of the year. Some
snakes lay eggs and others produce the young alive. There is about an
even division of these types in Kansas. The king snakes, rat snakes,
bull snakes, racers, and many smaller snakes lay eggs in early summer.
These eggs are deposited in a spot suitable for hatching, generally
beneath a rock or in the soil. When they hatch, the young fend for
themselves. In Kansas, water snakes, garter snakes, poisonous snakes,
and some smaller snakes give birth to living young in late summer or
early fall. Again, the young are on their own after birth. With the
coming of cooler weather the snakes leave their summer feeding grounds
and travel to places where they will hibernate for the winter.


MYTHS: Probably no other group of animals has had the variety and
expanse of tall tales credited to them as have the snakes. As the
stories go, there are snakes that can put their tails in their mouths
and roll downhill hoop-like, snakes that are capable of milking cows
dry, snakes that fly into pieces when struck and later reassemble into
whole snakes again, snakes that charm their prey, and others too
numerous to mention here. Some of these tales deal specifically with the
poisonous power of snakes or with snakes that are venomous. There is the
“Blow viper,” whose very breath is poisonous! The butt of this fable is
the utterly harmless hog-nosed snake, pictured on Page 13. Many persons
think that the poisonous “fang” of a snake is the structure which is
frequently flicked in and out of the snake’s mouth. This is really its
tongue, and is present in _all_ snakes. The “fang” is an enlarged tooth
in the upper jaw (see diagram, page 5). Four of the many untruths about
poisonous snakes are (1) rattlesnakes cannot cross a horsehair
rope—_they can_! (2) cottonmouth water moccasins cannot bite under
water—_they can_! (3) rattlesnakes always rattle before they strike—_not
always_! (4) the rattles present on the tail of a rattlesnake indicate
the snake’s age—_no_, a new segment is added each time that the skin is
shed, which may occur several times during a year.


FOOD: Most of the adult poisonous snakes of Kansas consume only
warm-blooded prey, consisting primarily of small rodents: white-footed
mice, shrews, voles, and cotton rats in the fields, and house mice and
rats about human habitations. Small birds and young rabbits may be
taken, as well as occasional lizards and insects. The copperhead is more
insectivorous than the rattlesnakes, and the cottonmouth feeds upon
other creatures that inhabit the edges of waterways.

The poison of venomous snakes is not only a defensive mechanism, but
also a highly efficient food-getting device. Whereas some of the snakes
strike and hold the prey within their jaws until the poison has rendered
it helpless, others only strike and follow the trail to where the victim
falls.

In feeding, the snake does not chew its food, but swallows it whole. The
jaws are wonderfully adapted for this purpose, having the bones on each
side of the jaws attached to their mates on the other side by an elastic
ligament, and the upper and lower jaws also joined by such an
attachment. This allows the jaws to be spread apart and lowered, making
an opening capable of taking in a food item actually larger in diameter
than the snake! The teeth of both the upper and lower jaws are recurved,
pointing inward, and as each section of the jaw can work independently,
one side secures its grip while the other side moves forward. Thus, the
snake actually crawls around its food.


ABUNDANCE: The non-poisonous snakes far outnumber the poisonous kinds,
both in number of species and individuals. In the United States, there
are approximately 95 species of non-poisonous snakes and only 19 species
of poisonous ones, including 15 rattlesnakes, one copperhead, one
cottonmouth, and two coral snakes. In Kansas, there are six species of
poisonous snakes (two should hardly be counted) and 34 species of
non-poisonous snakes. Many of the non-poisonous species are common and
widespread. It is far more probable that any snake seen is non-poisonous
than poisonous.


SNAKE BITE: Venom is secreted from glands within the head, on each side
behind the eyes, causing the swollen appearance of the head in this
region. The venom travels through ducts to each of the two fangs. The
fangs are enlarged teeth in the front of the upper jaw. They are hollow,
with one end connected to the poison duct and the other end having an
opening on the front edge near the tip. The fangs are also fastened to a
moveable bone, which enables the fangs to be folded back against the
upper jaw when the mouth is shut and erected and directed forward when
the mouth is opened to strike. The power of a strike imbeds the fangs
into the skin of the victim, and muscles force venom from the glands
through the duct and hollow fang and out of the opening at the tip. The
venom causes a breakdown of the red blood corpuscles and walls of blood
vessels. It also has an effect upon the nervous system. Some snakes have
venom which is much more destructive to the nervous system. The pit
vipers have venom which is more _hemotoxic_ (destructive to blood),
whereas the coral snake, which belongs to the cobra group, has a venom
which is _neurotoxic_ (destructive to nerves).

The venom is yellowish and somewhat “thicker” than water. The amount of
poison ejected at any one strike varies from a part of a drop to 2 cubic
centimeters, depending upon size and kind of snake, and time elapsed
since last venom ejection. Various factors influence the amount of venom
which is injected into the victim, i.e., smaller snakes have smaller
fangs and less venom; strikes through clothing or footwear are less
effective.

It has been estimated that there are fewer than 50 deaths due to snake
bite in the United States in a year; most of these bites result from
imprudent handling of venomous serpents. There has been no survey of
snakebite in Kansas, but few deaths are reported annually. At times
several years have elapsed without any deaths being reported. Most
victims are less than 20 years of age and most bites occur on the hands,
feet, arms, or legs.

It should be stressed that poisonous snakes cannot be made harmless by
removing the fangs. The poison glands and ducts remain and other teeth
can still scratch the skin, allowing entrance of the venom. Also,
“reserve” fangs are normally present. These are immature fangs lying
along the upper jaw bone. At intervals a reserve fang grows down beside
a fang which has been used for some time. The old fang is shed and a new
sharp “hypodermic needle” is in position. Thus, snakes are sometimes
found with three or four fangs.

    [Illustration: Skulls]

    DUCT
    POISON GLAND
    FANG
    SHEATH
    TONGUE
  SKULLS
    NON-POISONOUS
    POISONOUS
      REPLACEMENT FANGS

Snake venom is used to manufacture _antivenin_, which is injected into
snakebite victims to help counteract the effects of the poison. The
venom is injected in graduated doses into horses, which build up an
immunity to the venom. Blood is withdrawn from the horse and the serum
is processed to produce antivenin.


      How To Tell A Poisonous From A Non-Poisonous Snake In Kansas

The features given here apply only to Kansas snakes and may not be
applicable elsewhere. Even in Kansas, there are some non-poisonous
snakes which exhibit either the tail or eye characteristics given for
poisonous snakes, but none have the pit. It probably need not be pointed
out that these features can be seen only when the snake can be examined
closely. Certainly, every snake should not be picked up to look for
these characteristics! A warning is necessary at this point—reflex
action can cause an apparently “dead” snake to bite, so do not handle
“dead” snakes with the hands; use a stick. The best way to be able to
identify a poisonous snake is to know _all_ of the venomous snakes of
your region by sight. Color and pattern are distinctive and are easily
learned.


                               POISONOUS

    [Illustration: POISONOUS]

  1. Pupil of eye elliptical (cat-like)
  2. Pit between eye and nostril
  3. Two enlarged teeth (fangs) in front of the upper jaw
  4. Scales on underside of tail in a single row


                             NON-POISONOUS

    [Illustration: NON-POISONOUS]

  1. Pupil of eye round
  2. No pit between eye and nostril
  3. All teeth of upper jaw approximately same size
  4. Scales on underside of tail in a double row


                     Key To Kansas Poisonous Snakes

  I. No rattle or button on end of tail.
    1. Color pink-brown to red-brown with 10-20 light-edged crossbands
          on body, narrow on top and wider at lower side. Dark spot
          coinciding with and between each crossband at lower edge of
          side. Top of head copper-colored—COPPERHEAD, (page 7).
    2. Always in vicinity of water. Pattern generally obscured by dark
          grey or black. If pattern is obvious, crossbands not narrow on
          mid-back and top of head not copper-colored (Note: extremely
          restricted range in Kansas)—COTTONMOUTH (page 7).
  II. End of tail provided with a button or rattles.
    1. Top of head provided with paired plates, (see diagram), dark
          colored, small size, MASSASAUGA (page 10).
    2. Top of head covered with numerous small scales; no paired plates.
      (a) tail pattern alternating black and chalk white bands—WESTERN
          DIAMOND-BACK RATTLER (page 10).
      (b) tail pattern same as rest of body—PRAIRIE RATTLER (page 11).
      (c) tail entirely velvety black—TIMBER RATTLER (page 11).

    [Illustration: TAIL TIPS]

  TAIL TIPS
    NONE
    BUTTON
    RATTLE
  HEAD
    MASSASAUGA
    OTHER RATTLERS
  TAILS OF RATTLERS
    WESTERN DIAMOND-BACK
    TIMBER
    PRAIRIE


COPPERHEAD (_Agkistrodon contortrix_). Length usually 2-3 feet. Common
where it occurs, the copperhead is probably the most abundant poisonous
snake in eastern Kansas. It is most frequently found in the vicinity of
rocky ledges in oak-hickory-walnut woods, but it ranges widely, so that
individuals may be found in almost any habitat during summer months.
Although generally nocturnal during most of its active season, its habit
of lying in the open during the daytime among dried leaves in patches of
sunlight and shadow causes the pattern to blend perfectly with the
background. Any hiker through this habitat should be alert. Because of
the rather small size, usually inoffensive disposition, and the low
toxicity of its venom this snake should be placed on the non-fatal list
for adults. Elderly persons, those in poor health, or small children
could find the copperhead bite fatal, however.

    [Illustration: Map]

A subspecies of the copperhead occurs along the southern border of
Kansas. In this form, the crossbands are wider along the mid-line than
the more northern variety.

Young copperheads have a sulfur-yellow tail. This color is lost as the
snake matures. It is thought that this contrasting tail color is used as
a lure to bring prey within striking distance of the small snake. The
young are born in August or September. There may be from two to ten in a
litter.


COTTONMOUTH (_Agkistrodon piscivorus_). Length 3-4 feet. The poisonous
water moccasin has been taken only once in Kansas. This was on the
Neosho River in Labette County at the Cherokee County line. It is on the
basis of this single specimen that it is counted as one of the snakes of
Kansas! The many general reports of water moccasins in Kansas refer to
the mistaken identification of the harmless water snakes that are common
throughout most of the state (see page 12). Young cottonmonths are
patterned quite like a wide-banded copperhead, but the colors are not so
reddish. These snakes are always found in the vicinity of water. When
approached they quite often hold their ground and open their mouths
widely, revealing the white lining of the mouth, a habit which gives
them their common name. This heavy-bodied snake is dangerously poisonous
and, contrary to popular belief, can bite underwater.

    [Illustration: Map]

Whereas the copperhead is a rather mild-mannered snake, the cottonmouth
has a vicious disposition. Although nocturnal, it likes to sun-bathe,
and it is frequently seen basking along shorelines, stretched out on low
branches or upon the bank. Where this snake occurs, it is usually
common.

Generally, eight or nine young are born in August or September, although
the number of young may range from five to fifteen. Like the copperhead,
the young have a yellow tail tip.

    [Illustration: COPPERHEAD]

    [Illustration: COTTONMOUTH]

    [Illustration: MASSASAUGA]

    [Illustration: WESTERN DIAMOND-BACK]

    [Illustration: TIMBER RATTLER]

    [Illustration: PRAIRIE RATTLER]

                                                                  Clarke


MASSASAUGA (_Sistrurus catenatus_). Length 24-27 inches. This snake
belongs to a group of small rattlesnakes called “ground” or “pygmy”
rattlers, which are differentiated from the larger rattlers by having
paired scales on top of the head, as have the copperhead, cottonmouth,
and non-poisonous snakes. The massasauga occurs in open fields and rocky
outcroppings. It is particularly common in the Flint Hills. This is the
“prairie rattler” of eastern Kansas, often found under hay bales in
fields. Its food consists primarily of small rodents. The small size and
usually docile disposition of this snake tend to place it upon the
non-dangerous list, but its venom is extremely toxic, and _any_ bite
from a poisonous snake is dangerous. When aroused, these small snakes
strike with a fury not seen in the larger snakes. The rattling of this
small snake is hardly louder than the buzz of a grasshopper.

    [Illustration: Map]

The name “massasauga” is an Indian term, meaning “swamp dweller,” a
habitat preference which is evidenced more in the states to the
northeast of Kansas.

Two subspecies occur in Kansas. In the eastern part of the state is the
form that occurs eastward of Kansas, characterized by the dark belly;
the lighter-bellied form extends westward from eastern Kansas into
states to the southwest.

About eight or nine young are born, usually in August or September.


WESTERN DIAMOND-BACKED RATTLESNAKE (_Crotalus atrox_). Length 4-5 feet,
although some are larger. In the United States, probably more deaths are
caused by this snake than by any other. A combination of large size,
wide distribution, abundance, and touchy temperament give this
distinction to this snake. It is hardly a member of the Kansas snake
fauna, having been found only twice in the state, both times in the
southeastern corner. It should occur, although presently unrecorded, in
south-central Kansas along the Oklahoma line. It is rather common in
Oklahoma, just south of this region. The diamond-back prefers dry open
plains and canyons, where it feeds upon small rodents, young rabbits,
and occasionally, birds. The ground color varies somewhat from buff to
gray; the snake generally has a faded appearance. The black and white
tail bands are distinctive.

    [Illustration: Map]

About ten young are born in late summer or early fall. Larger litters
have been recorded. The young are fully capable of inflicting a
dangerous bite as soon as they are born—and quite willing to do so!

In northern Oklahoma, an annual rattlesnake roundup is held, in which
several hundred diamond-backs are captured. These are processed for
their venom, from which antitoxin is made. Some of the rattlesnakes are
cooked and their steaks used in a banquet. The meat is firm and quite
tasty!


TIMBER RATTLESNAKE (_Crotalus horridus_). Length 3-4 feet, occasionally
longer. The timber rattler occurs only in eastern Kansas and is only
locally common, at scattered localities. It prefers the deciduous forest
where limestone rock outcrops as ledges, but may wander into cultivated
fields and open areas during late spring and summer. The food consists
primarily of small rodents and young rabbits. Ordinarily, it is a
mild-mannered snake, one which will seek to escape direct contact with
man, but its size and habit of living close to human habitations
necessitate considering this rattler dangerous. Ground color may vary
from a light gray to yellow, with the black chevron-shaped blotches of
the back uniting with lateral blotches to form crossbands. Another
common name for the timber rattler is _banded rattlesnake_. Some
individuals may be almost _all_ black. The tail is characteristically
velvet black in adults; banded in young.

    [Illustration: Map]

During late spring and summer the timber rattler is quite often
encountered crossing roads, where its large size and slow movement often
make it a victim of modern transportation.

The timber rattler has a habit of frequently spending daylight time just
beneath the edge of overhanging rocks. A hiker should always look
beneath any rocks of this sort before using the rock as a resting place.


PRAIRIE RATTLESNAKE (_Crotalus viridis_). Length 3-4 feet. This
rattlesnake is common in western Kansas, where it frequents rocky open
regions, grassy prairies, and agricultural areas. In eastern Kansas it
has been found only in the Pittsburg vicinity, and any “prairie rattler”
east of Wichita or Manhattan is usually the massasauga. The habit of
denning in large groups is well-known. Several hundred have been found
in hibernation in a single den. The food of the prairie rattler is
warm-blooded, mostly rodents and small rabbits. It appears to be active
in the daytime, whereas the other poisonous snakes are mainly nocturnal.
The ground color varies from a light gray to green, and the pattern of
dorsal blotches with alternating rows of lateral blotches may cause it
to be confused with the smaller massasauga, but the scales on top of the
head are all small on the prairie rattler, whereas paired plates are
present on the massasauga (see diagram, page 6).

    [Illustration: Map]

Young are born in late summer or early fall. Usually nine to twelve
constitute a litter. As few as five and as many as seventeen have been
recorded, however.

It has been found that any one female prairie rattler gives birth to a
litter of young every other year. These young are generally about twelve
inches in length.

This snake has a wide range over western United States, where it is
probably the most common rattlesnake. It is frequently found in prairie
dog villages. The burrows of these animals are utilized as shelter and
the young are used as food items.




                      Some Common Harmless Snakes


The following six snakes are representative of the harmless snakes
commonly and incorrectly thought to be poisonous by the general public.


1. HOG-NOSED SNAKE. Length 2-2½ feet. This is the “blow viper,”
“spreadhead viper,” “spreading adder,” or other equally ill-named snake
usually found in dry sandy areas. It has a threatening defensive bluff
which consists of spreading the fore part of the body cobra-like,
hissing and striking (but with mouth closed). Failing to intimidate its
opponent, the snake will contort its body convulsively and roll onto its
back—apparently dead. It will remain inert unless rolled over onto its
stomach; then it will roll onto its back again—the only proper attitude
for a dead snake!


2. BLUE RACER. Length 3-4 feet. Many stories are told about this snake
attacking persons. It is doubted that most are true interpretations of
fact. These rapid-moving snakes may come at a person who is in line with
the snake’s preconceived idea of an escape route. Upon capture, most
blue racers will bite, but they are definitely non-poisonous. These
snakes feed mostly upon small rodents. The color varies in individuals
from blue-green to olive or olive-brown; underside is yellow.


3. COMMON WATER SNAKE. Length 2-3 feet. This snake and the
yellow-bellied water snake, of very similar appearance, are the most
often noted snakes along creeks, rivers, lakes, and ponds. These are
usually the “moccasins” that frighten persons near water. Entirely
harmless, but with a vicious disposition, these snakes feed upon small
fish, frogs, and other creatures that inhabit their neighborhood.


4. DIAMOND-BACKED WATER SNAKE. Length 3 feet. Heavy body, dark
appearance, and mean disposition give this particular snake a bad
reputation. More than any other Kansas snake, this one gives rise to
stories of the poisonous cottonmouth being distributed throughout
eastern and southern portions of the state. It is always found in the
vicinity of water and feeds upon creatures it finds there.


5. PILOT BLACK SNAKE. Length 5-6 feet. Also more properly called the
black rat snake, a descriptive title which is particularly apt.
Occasionally, this large snake may find where hen eggs are available and
become a nuisance in the hen house, but the wise farmer who allows one
of these snakes to stay around the barn and corncrib will reap dividends
from the destruction wrought upon the rodent population. This snake is a
much better mouser than any cat!


6. RED MILK SNAKE. Length 2-3 feet. A beautiful jewel of a snake, this
small creature has been credited with the ability to milk a cow dry!
Such a feat is impossible for a number of reasons. This reputation was
acquired because this snake was frequently found in barns, where it had
gone in search of mice, a favorite food item. The color pattern might be
confused with that of the poisonous coral snake (not found in Kansas).
In the coral snake, however, the red and yellow rings are adjacent.

    [Illustration: HOG-NOSED SNAKE]

    [Illustration: BLUE RACER]

    [Illustration: PILOT BLACKSNAKE]

    [Illustration: COMMON WATER SNAKE]

    [Illustration: DIAMOND-BACKED WATER SNAKE]

    [Illustration: RED MILK SNAKE]

                                                                  Clarke


                        Treatment of Snake Bite

If possible, determine definitely if the snake is poisonous. If it is
not, no treatment is necessary other than application of an antiseptic.
If the snake is poisonous, typical symptoms will appear rapidly: bruised
appearance at bite, noticeable swelling, and intense pain. Later, the
victim may become nauseated and may even faint. The important thing to
do is to get to a doctor or a hospital as soon as possible. In the
meantime, the following measures should be taken to retard the spread of
the venom.

  1. Place tourniquet between bite and body. Use handkerchief, tie, or
  any other handy cloth. Tie loosely around arm, place stick in slack
  part and twist. (Fig. A) Tourniquet should not be too tight. Should be
  able to push finger under it. Loosen for a minute every 15 minutes. If
  bitten on hand or lower arm, be sure to remove any rings, bracelets,
  or watches.

    [Illustration: A]

  2. Sterilize a knife or razor blade, using a match, and make a cut
  through each fang puncture ¼ inch deep and ½ inch long, parallel to
  limb. (Fig. B).

    [Illustration: B]

  3. Apply suction to cuts, using either the cup from a snake-bite kit
  or the mouth, if there are no sores, cracked lips, or bleeding gums.
  Continue suction for several minutes. (Fig. C).

    [Illustration: C]

  4. As swelling progresses up limb, tourniquet should be moved ahead of
  swelling and additional cuts and suction should be made at edge of
  swelling. (Fig. D).

    [Illustration: D]

  5. A wet compress should be applied over all cuts to encourage
  bleeding. (Fig. E).

    [Illustration: E]

Upon arrival at doctor’s or hospital, antivenom may be injected after
the determination for serum sensitivity. Antivenin may be administered
by a person other than a doctor, but this is recommended only in cases
where a doctor or hospital is not readily accessible.

Snake bite kits are available at most drug stores and should be carried
by persons or groups going into areas inhabited by poisonous snakes.


                              PRECAUTIONS

  1. Don’t step over logs. Step on top and _look_ before stepping down.
  2. When climbing rocky ledges or turning over logs or rocks, don’t
          place hands where you can’t see.
  3. When walking among leaves, rocks, or grass, _look_ before you step.
  4. Don’t keep poisonous snakes.
  5. Learn to recognize by sight the poisonous snakes of your region,
          their habits and habitats.


                               References

Conant, Roger. 1958. _A Field Guide to Reptiles and Amphibians._ 366
      pages. Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston. $3.95.

Klauber, Lawrence M. 1956. _Rattlesnakes: their habits, life histories,
      and influences on mankind._ 2 vols. University of California
      Press, Berkeley.

Minton, Sherman A. _Snake-bite in the midwestern region._ Quarterly
      Bulletin, Indiana University Medical Center, Vol. 14, No. 2.

Minton, Sherman A. Snakebite. _Scientific American_, January 1957, Vol.
      196, No. 1.

Oliver, James A. 1955. _The Natural History of North American Amphibians
      and Reptiles._ 359 pages. D. Van Nostrand Co., Princeton, N. J.

Pope, Clifford H. 1955. _The Reptile World._ 325 pages. Alfred A. Knopf,
      N.Y.

Pope, Clifford H. 1952. _Snakes Alive and How They Live._ 238 pages. The
      Viking Press, N. Y.

Schmidt, Karl P. and D. Dwight Davis. 1941. _Field Book of Snakes of the
      United States and Canada._ G. P. Putnam’s Sons, New York.

Smith, Hobart M. 1956. _Handbook of Amphibians and Reptiles of Kansas._
      356 pages. University of Kansas, Museum of Natural History, $1.50.

Werler, John E. 1950. The poisonous snakes of Texas and the first aid
      treatment of their bites. _Texas Fish and Game_, February, 1950.

Wyeth, Inc., Philadelphia, Pa. _Antivenin_ (North American Antisnakebite
      Serum). 15 pages.


                            ABOUT THIS ISSUE

The cover picture is a copperhead. This snake was photographed alive,
but somewhat anesthetized with ether, by Dr. John Breukelman and the
author, using a single-lens reflex 35 mm. camera, type A Kodachrome film
and two photofloods. The illustrations on page 14 were taken by these
same two, using a Polaroid Land camera, photofloods, and graduate
student George Ratzlafl as victim. The line drawings and color
illustrations were made by the author. The color plates of non-poisonous
and poisonous snakes were painted in water colors, using live and
preserved snakes as models. The original paintings have been reduced
one-half in this publication.


Poisonous snakes are only one aspect of the study of herpetology, which
includes other reptiles, as well as amphibians. These together may be
referred to as herptiles. There are 97 species of herptiles in Kansas: 9
salamanders, 20 frogs and toads, 15 lizards, 40 snakes, and 13 turtles.
The turtles of Kansas have been described in a past issue of The Kansas
School Naturalist (April, 1956), and an issue on the lizards of the
state is in preparation.


                            PREVIOUS ISSUES

Oct. 1954, Window Nature Study; Dec. 1954, Wildlife in Winter; Feb.
1955, Children’s Books for Nature Study (First in a series): April 1955,
Let’s Go Outdoors; Oct. 1955, Fall Wildflowers; Dec. 1955, Snow; Feb.
1956, Spring Wildflowers; April 1956, Turtles in Kansas; Oct. 1956,
Hawks in Kansas; Dec. 1956, Children’s Books for Nature Study (Second in
the series); Feb. 1957, Life in a Pond; April 1957, Spiders; Oct. 1957,
Along the Roadside; Dec. 1957, An Outline for Conservation Teaching in
Kansas; Feb. 1958, Trees; April 1958, Summer Wildflowers; Oct. 1958,
Watersheds in Kansas; Dec. 1958, Let’s Build Equipment.

Those printed in boldface type are still available upon request. The
others are out of print, but may be found in many school and public
libraries in Kansas.


                       AUDUBON SCREEN TOUR SERIES

The Biology Department of the Kansas State Teachers College of Emporia
is sponsoring its second _Audubon Screen Tour Series_ during the current
school year. This series consists of five all-color motion pictures of
wildlife, scenics, plant science, and conservation, personally narrated
by leading naturalists. Three of the five programs have been presented;
the other two will be given in Albert Taylor Hall at 8:00 p.m. on the
dates listed below.

  OLIN SEWALL PETTINGILL, JR., Penguin Summer, Monday, April 13.
  WILLIAM FERGUSON, This Curious World in Nature, Friday, May 15.

Plan to attend with some of your students. Family and single admission
tickets are available. For additional information write to Carl Prophet,
Biology Department, KSTC, Emporia.


                        WORKSHOP IN CONSERVATION

Plan now to attend the 1959 Workshop in Conservation, which will be a
part of the 1959 Summer Session of the Kansas State Teachers College of
Emporia, June 2 to 19, and June 22 to July 10, 1959.

As in the past several years, the Workshop will cover water, soil,
grassland, and wildlife conservation teaching. Such topics as geography
and climate of Kansas, water resources, soil erosion problems and
control, grass as a resource, bird banding, wildflowers, conservation
clubs, and conservation teaching in various grades will be discussed.
There will be lectures, demonstrations, discussion groups, films,
slides, field trips, projects, and individual and group reports. You may
enroll for undergraduate or graduate credit.

Any interested person may enroll in the first section, enrollment in the
second section is limited to those who have an established interest in
conservation and some teaching experience.

Fee for first section (3 hours credit): Residents of Kansas, $22.95;
non-resident, $42.45

Fee for second section (1, 2, or 3 hours credit): Residents of Kansas,
$7.65 per hour; non-resident, $14.15 per hour

For other information about the Workshop write Robert F. Clarke,
Department of Biology, KSTC, Emporia, Kansas.


                      The Kansas School Naturalist
                   The Kansas State Teachers College
                  Twelfth Avenue and Commercial Street
                            Emporia, Kansas

                      Second-class mail privileges
                     authorized at Emporia, Kansas




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of Project Gutenberg's Poisonous Snakes of Kansas, by Robert F. Clarke

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POISONOUS SNAKES OF KANSAS ***

***** This file should be named 59061-0.txt or 59061-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/0/6/59061/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

